                                                        Top Songs Database

Project Description:

One of my great passions is music. For the Extract, Transform & Load Project I wanted to explore the music that has affected the way we live and love, the songs considered the best in the English language.

This project attempts to answer the following questions:

1)	What are the best songs based on the ranking criteria?
2)	Which artists were most prolific in the top 5000?
3)	Did particular decades produce more “great” songs than others?

Luckily for me there is a project that ranked the top 5000 tracks in aggregate based on polls, sales and awards won (TopSongs.csv). So I started with that.I then come across the Million Song Dataset (music.csv), which derived metadata about one million contemporary songs.

This project contains esoteric information such as “tatums” (the shortest time between consecutive musical notes on the track) and fadeout in addition to a song’s duration and the location where the track was released.

Ideally I would have liked to have included the album on which these popular songs were first released. But this data proved difficult to obtain without API pulls. I have included an Excel dataset for Rolling Stone’s “The 500 Greatest Albums” (albumlist.xls), but I couldn’t find a way to include it that made sense.

The Process:

Initially I performed research to gather the data pertinent to answer the questions posed. Then I imported the data (in csv and xlxs forms) into Jupyter notebook in order to clean and manipulate the datasets. The sheer number of columns involved made it difficult to do data cleaning, manipulation and analysis. 

It became clear that much of the data (especially metadata) would not be relevant, so I filtered the original datasets in Pandas, extracting those columns relevant to the planned database. From the metadata, these included the following fields: artist_familiarity, artist_location, artist_name, artist_terms (genre), duration, loudness, and tempo.

I wanted to discover the artists whose songs permeate the top 5000. So I grouped the tracks by artist, making sure to give the same rank to performers who produced the same number of top tracks. Similarly I grouped the songs by decade to generate a visualization in pie chart form.

Transform: (Data Cleanup & Analysis)

Types of transformation needed for the data: Cleaning, Filtering, Aggregation
•	Import and convert the .csv files into Pandas Data frames.
•	Aggregate DataFrames to pull all values into one .csv file
•	Group the data to determine and rank the prolific artists who produced the most “best” songs
•	Analyze the tracks by year and visualizing  in pie chart form by decade
•	Define the classes (tables) and fields for the database, then convert the data frames back to csv form
•	Import the new csv files into a SQL relational database using SQL Alchemy and SQLite

Conclusions:

•	No one decade produced the “best’ songs. The 5000 tracks range from the 1940s to the present.

•	Here is a list of the top ten songs:

Rank	Artist	Song
1	Bing Crosby	White Christmas
2	Bill Haley & his Comets	Rock Around the Clock
3	Celine Dion	My Heart Will Go On
4	Sinead O'Connor	Nothing Compares 2 U
5	The Beatles	Hey Jude
6	Bryan Adams	(Everything I Do) I Do it For You
7	Whitney Houston	I Will Always Love You
8	Pink Floyd	Another Brick in the Wall (part 2)
9	Irene Cara	Flashdance... What a Feeling
10	Elton John	Candle in the Wind '97

•	Here is  a list of the artists producing the most songs in the top 5000:

Rank	Artist    # Songs
1	Elvis Presley	43
2	The Beatles	42
3	Madonna	41
4	The Rolling Stones	31
5	Michael Jackson	29
6	Elton John	26
7	Bing Crosby	24
8	Mariah Carey	23
9	U2	23
10	Janet Jackson	21

This repo includes the following:

Resources Folder:

Contains the Jupyter Notebook that contains the code used for the project:

•	music.ipynb – Python code that reads the data from csv files, aggregates it into a unitary Pandas data frame, uses Matplotlibt to plot pie chart and pushes three csv files into SQL database using SQLite and SQL Alchemy

Output Folder:

•	number_songs_by_decade.png  - a pie chart that breaks down the percentage of songs by decade
•	music.sqlite – file generated by engine to import classes(tables) into SQL
•	artist_csv, rank_csv, song_csv – csv’s exported to engine with same fields as SQL tables

Data Sources:

•	music.csv - https://github.com/angrbrd/top5000-playlist/blob/master/TopSongs.csv
Aggregate ranking of tracks based on polls, radio play, sales and awards.
•	artist.csv - https://think.cs.vt.edu/corgis/csv/music/music.html 
This library comes from the Million Song Dataset, which used a company called the Echo Nest to derive data points about one million popular contemporary songs. The data contains standard information about the songs such as artist name, title, and year released. Additionally, the data contains more advanced information; for example, the musical key of the song, 
•	albumlist.xls –  https://www.kaggle.com/notgibs/500-greatest-albums-of-all-time-rolling-stone
The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" is a list compiled by American magazine “Rolling Stone” .The rankings were based on votes from selected rock musicians, critics, and industry figures. Ultimately I did not use this dataset because the only way to obtain the album associated with a particular song was through API queries. 

Future Work and Improvements:

To further enhance the project I would need the original album on which each of the tracks was released. This information is available on various APIs, the best of which is LastFM. Obtaining this information would allow me to add an album table to the schema.
